docs: added Log Namespacing tutorial (#15954)
vectordotdev/vector: docs/tutorials/lognamespacing.md

# Log Namespacing

This walks through the steps required to add log namespacing to a given source.

> Log Namespacing as a new feature in Vector that allows different fields of the Log 
> event to be kept under separate namespaces, thus avoiding conflicts where two different
> fields try to have the same name. Log Namespacing does not apply to Metric events.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Log Namespacing is a new feature in Vector that allows different fields of the Log 
event to be kept under separate namespaces, thus avoiding conflicts where two different
fields try to use the same name. Log Namespacing does not apply to Metric events.
```

## Config

Add the following field to the `Config` struct:

```rust
    /// The namespace to use for logs. This overrides the global setting.
    #[configurable(metadata(docs::hidden))]
    #[serde(default)]
    pub log_namespace: Option<bool>,
```

Currently, because log namespacing is an unreleased feature we add the `docs::hidden`

> metadata so it doesn't appear in the documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
attribute so it doesn't appear in the documentation.
```

Technically an attribute I think?

Author: Yeah I agree.

```

The `cx.log_namespace` function gives us a `LogNamespace` enum that we can use to
set the fields in the appropriate section of the Event.

This `log_namespace` variable needs to be passed to any functions that will insert 
data into the log event that is emitted by the source.

### Vector metadata

The Vector namespace contains data pertinent to how the event was ingested into 
Vector. Currently two fields need to be added to this namespace - `ingest_timestamp`
and `source_type`:

```rust
  self.log_namespace.insert_vector_metadata(
      &mut log_event,
      path!(self.timestamp_key()),
      path!("ingest_timestamp"),
      chrono::Utc::now(),
  );
            
  self.log_namespace.insert_vector_metadata(
      &mut log_event,
      path!(self.source_type_key()),
      path!("source_type"),
      DnstapConfig::NAME,
  );
```

If we look at the parameters to `insert_vector_metadata`:

```rust
    pub fn insert_vector_metadata<'a>(
        &self,
        log: &mut LogEvent,
        legacy_key: impl ValuePath<'a>,
        metadata_key: impl ValuePath<'a>,
        value: impl Into<Value>,
    ) 
```

#### log

This needs to be the log event that is being populated.

> #### legacy_key

Reviewer: This section could probably use a note about properly handling user provided paths (`file_key` option from the `file` source).

This is the name of the field the timestamp is to be inserted into
when using the Legacy Namespace. This will typically be values returned
by calls to `log_schema().source_type_key()` and `log_schema().timestamp_key()`.

> #### metdata_key

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### metadata_key
```

The name of the field when it is inserted into the Vector namespace. This 

> will be `path!("ingest_timestamp")` or `path!(source_type)`. The field names

Reviewer: ```suggestion
will be `path!("ingest_timestamp")` or `path!("source_type")`. The field names
```

can be hardcoded since they are going into the Vector namespace, so conflicts
with other field names cannot occur.

#### value

The actual value to be placed into the field. 

For the ingest timestamp this will be `chrono::Utc::now()`. Source type will be
the `NAME` property of the `Config` struct. `NAME` is provided by the 

> `configurable_component` macro. You may need to include `use vector_config::NamedComponent;`.

Reviewer: Note that batches of events can use a pre-calculated `Utc::now()` rather than calling for each event in the batch.

> ### insert_standard_vector_source_metadata

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### insert_standard_vector_source_metadata(...)
```

A utility function has been provided that can be used in a lot of cases to 
insert both these fields into the Vector namespace:

```rust

  log_namespace.insert_standard_vector_source_metadata(
      log,
      KafkaSourceConfig::NAME,
      Utc::now(),
  );
```

### Source Metadata

Other fields that describe the event - but are not the actual data for the event
should go into the source metadata. Examples of source metadata are 

- The Kafka topic when pulling from a Kafka stream.
- Severity and Facility fields from a Syslog message.
- The file path when pulling data from a file.
- The timestamp extracted from the message (this can be different to the time

>   the message was ingested.)

Reviewer: 🤔 wouldn't this be actual event data (at the `.` path), while the source metadata would be (`kubernetes_logs` example) when the container runtime processed the log emitted by the application(s).

Author: Ah , yes.

The main log event should contain only the real log message that the 
event is representing. 

For the Vector namespace the data should be at the top level and not
contained in any subfields. For an event that is a single String value -
typically, in the Legacy namespace this will be inserted in a field 
called `message`. In the Vector namespace the event will be just this
String value.

In this case code that creates an event typically looks similar to:

```rust
    let mut log = match log_namespace {
        LogNamespace::Vector => LogEvent::from(message),
        LogNamespace::Legacy => {
            let mut log = LogEvent::default();

            // Add message
            log.insert(log_schema().message_key(), message);
            log
        }
    };
```

Other fields should be inserted into the event like:

```rust
  log_event.insert(event_path!("path"), value);
```

## Timestamps

We need to talk about timestamps. A timestamp can represent a number 
of different things.

- Ingest timestamp - This is the timestamp when the event was received
  by Vector. This should go in the Vector metadata.
- Timestamp - This should be any timestamp extracted from the incoming 

>   message. No timestamp 

Reviewer: Note to complete this sentence/section

> It is worth noticing that existing sources have not always been consistent

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is worth recognizing that existing sources have not always been consistent
```

with this. Some sources would insert a timestamp that is extracted from the
event but default to the ingest timestamp if it didn't exist. Others insert 
the timestamp extracted from the event and don't insert a timestamp at all
if it didn't exist. Others will always insert the ingest timestamp. To 
maintain backward compatibility there is a few areas in the code base that
do some seemingly overly complicated things with timestamps. It is worth 
bearing this in mind when looking through existing new code.

> All new sources should work like the above.

Reviewer: With regard to new sources, probably worth mentioning (like `amqp`, I think) we didn't allow user configured field names to make things less complicated - new sources should continue to do so.

Author: Not sure I understand what you mean?

Author: Gotcha

Reviewer: It's _sorta_ out of scope for this document, as I think about it today, but I'd expect the times we'd be referring to this doc would be the same time someone would be adding a new source - so it makes _some_ sense (at least to me 😄 )

# Log Namespacing

This walks through the steps required to add log namespacing to a given source.

Log Namespacing is a new feature in Vector that allows different fields of the Log 
event to be kept under separate namespaces, thus avoiding conflicts where two different

> fields try to use the same name. Log Namespacing does not apply to Metric events.

Reviewer: I mean, there's the implication that it's log event only because "Log" namespace - but specificity never hurts 😆

### insert_standard_vector_source_metadata(...)

A utility function has been provided that can be used in a lot of cases to 
insert both these fields into the Vector namespace:

```rust

  log_namespace.insert_standard_vector_source_metadata(
      log,
      KafkaSourceConfig::NAME,
      Utc::now(),
  );
```

### Source Metadata

Other fields that describe the event - but are not the actual data for the event
should go into the source metadata. Examples of source metadata are 

- The Kafka topic when pulling from a Kafka stream.
- Severity and Facility fields from a Syslog message.
- The file path when pulling data from a file.

To insert source metadata:

```rust
  log_namespace.insert_source_metadata(
      SyslogConfig::NAME,
      log,
      Some(LegacyKey::Overwrite("source_id")),
      path!("source_id"),
      default_host.clone(),
  );
```

Let's look at the parameters:

```rust
    pub fn insert_source_metadata<'a>(
        &self,
        source_name: &'a str,
        log: &mut LogEvent,
        legacy_key: Option<LegacyKey<impl ValuePath<'a>>>,
        metadata_key: impl ValuePath<'a>,
        value: impl Into<Value>,
    ) 
```

> #### source_name

Author: I think the main problem with making it a list is there are some parameters, eg.  `meaning` described later on that contains other lists, so it would get a bit confused.

The name of the source. This will be eg. `KafkaSourceConfig::NAME`.

#### log

The log event to populate.

#### legacy_key

The field name to populate for the legacy namespace. Pass `None` if
this field should not be inserted for Legacy. Because there is a 
possibility that the field might conflict with another field that 
is already in the event what to do in the case of conflicts must 
also be specified. `LegacyKey::Overwrite` will overwrite the existing
value with this value. `LegacyKey::InsertIfEmpty` keeps the original
value. 

#### metadata_key

The name of the path to insert into the Source metadata when in 
the Vector namespace. Because there is no chance of conflicting names

> here, this is typically just a hard coded value. eg. `path!("topic")`

Author: Even [wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hard_coding) is inconsistent with this one.

> here, this is typically just a hard coded value. eg. `path!("topic")`

Author: It looks like hardcode doesn't exist in the spell checker default dictionary, so I'm going to go with "hard code".

event is representing. 

For the Vector namespace the data should be at the top level and not
contained in any subfields. For an event that is a single String value -
typically, in the Legacy namespace this will be inserted in a field 
called `message`. In the Vector namespace the event will be just this
String value.

In this case code that creates an event typically looks similar to:

```rust
    let mut log = match log_namespace {
        LogNamespace::Vector => LogEvent::from(message),
        LogNamespace::Legacy => {
            let mut log = LogEvent::default();

            // Add message
            log.insert(log_schema().message_key(), message);
            log
        }
    };
```

Other fields should be inserted into the event like:

```rust
  log_event.insert(event_path!("path"), value);
```

## Timestamps

We need to talk about timestamps. A timestamp can represent a number 
of different things.

- Ingest timestamp - This is the timestamp when the event was received
  by Vector. This should go in the Vector metadata.
- Timestamp - This should be any timestamp extracted from the incoming 
  message.
  

> It is worth recognising that existing sources have not always been consistent

Reviewer: IME we've generally preferred American english, but haven't been particularly worried about it - especially given how globally distributed the team/contractors have been.

> It is worth recognising that existing sources have not always been consistent

Author: Our spell checker tool seems to recognise both words as being correct.

          legacy_subject_key_field,
          &owned_value_path!("subject"),
          Kind::bytes(),
          None,
      );
```

Let's look at the parameters:

```rust
    pub fn with_source_metadata(
        self,
        source_name: &str,
        legacy_path: Option<LegacyKey<OwnedValuePath>>,
        vector_path: &OwnedValuePath,
        kind: Kind,
        meaning: Option<&str>,
    ) -> Self
```

## source_name

The name of the source - typically something like `NatsSourceConfig::NAME`

## legacy_path

The pathname of the field when inserting in the Legacy namespace. This should be the
same value as used when inserting the data with `insert_source_metadata`.

## vector_path

The pathname of the field when inserting in the Vector namespace. This should be the
same value as used when inserting the data with `insert_source_metadata`.

## kind

This is the type the data will be. This is covered in detail below.

## meaning

Some fields are given a meaning. It is possible in VRL to refer to a field by it's 
meaning regardless of what name has been given to it. Fields with the following meaning
are used in Vector:

- message
- timestamp
- severity (?)

> TODO Where can I get a list of all the supported meanings?

Reviewer: AFAIK there is not a complete list compiled at this point - the meanings from `datadog_agent` are likely the only agreed upon meanings.
